Kristin Werner 
& Antje Nestler 



How can public engagement foster creative exchangebetween science and society? CollActive Materials, an 
experimental laboratory for science communication, offersa fresh approach through collaborative speculation. Fromfoundational concepts to practical workshop tools andworksheets, this guide offers tested methods for bringing 
together academic research, design, and society in cocreating 
pathways into a sustainable future. 


© CollActive Materials, 2025 

A digital version of this guidebook with worksheets is available online at: ↗ doi.org/10.18452/31342. 

This publication and all worksheets templates herein are published under a CC BY 4.0 licence. This means that you 
may use, share, and adapt them for any purpose, provided that you attribute them to CollActive Materials. Please 
find further information on attribution online at ↗ creativecommons.org. 

Content 

4 Introduction 
6 

14 

20 
22 Getting Started 

Chapter 1 Why Speculate with Research? 
Chapter 2 Guiding Questions for Designing Collaborative Speculation 
Chapter 3 Speculative Workshop Tools 
↗ Setting the Space 
↗ Speculation Groups 
↗ Speculative Introductions 
↗ Theme-Based Introductions 
↗ Futures Check-In 
28 Research Insights 
↗ Three Research Objects 
↗ Research Storytelling 
↗ Hands-On Experience 
34 Speculation 
↗ Speculation Tasks for Future Scenarios 
↗ Brainwriting 
↗ An Artifact from the Future 
↗ Speculation Sketch 
44 Prototyping 
↗ Object Prototyping 
↗ Collage Prototyping 
↗ Free Prototyping 
52 Sharing Futures 
↗ Future Pitch 
↗ Impromptu Exhibition 
↗ Gallery Walk 
↗ Takeaways 
58 
60 What is the Future Made Of? 
64 Futures of Air & AIRBOUND 
68 Visiting Material Futures 

Chapter 4 Case Studies from CollActive Materials 
75 Imprint 

76 About Us 


67 


WhySpeculate

In this chapter, we introduce key conceptsunderpinning our approach to speculatingwith research and its potential for sciencecommunication, research, individuals, and 
societies. At the end of the chapter, you will 

find case studies illustrating how collaborativespeculation can be applied across a broadspectrum of research and design disciplines. 

with 

Research? 


10 11 


12 13 


s• Nanotechnology (Schuijer,
Broerse, and Kupper 2021)
s• Nanotechnology (Schuijer,
Broerse, and Kupper 2021)
• Community Food-Growing(Chopra et al. 2022)
• Marginalized Communities 
Healthcare 
•Healthcare in Aging(Tsekleves et al. 2019) 
•Assisted Living, AssistedDying (Tsekleves et al.
2017) 
PolicyMaking• Dementia Policy (Darbyand Tsekleves 2018)
• Blockchain Policy(Pólvora and Nascimento2021) 
EmergingTechnologieUrbanDesign 
• Smart Cities(Forlano and Mathew 2014;
Nijs et al. 2020)
• More-than-Human Cities(Nijs et al. 2020) 
CommunityDev
Climate &
Ecology 
• Climate Futures (Beach,
Graves, and Fox 2024) 
• Bioeconomy (Schwabe,
Hülsen, and Trübswetter2022) 
• Anthropocene Crises(Tyszczuk 2021) 
and Values (Liao and Muller 
Chapter 1 — Why Speculate with Research? 
Education 
Systems 
• Near Future Schools(Duggan, Lindley, andMcNicol 2017)
• Augmented RealityLearning (Hansen, Knudsen,
and Ørngreen 2021) 
(Beattie, Brown, and Kindon• Digital Futures (Rülleret al. 2022) 
Figure 2: Selected collaborative speculation case studies 
14 
Reference List 

Ashby, Simone, Julian Hanna, Alwin 
De Rooij, Michelle Kasprzak, Julianne 
Hoekstra, and Sjuul Bos. 2023. 
»Articulating (Uncertain) AI Futures of 
Artistic Practice: A Speculative Design 
and Manifesto Sprint Approach.« In 

Proceedings of the 15th Conference 
on Creativity and Cognition (C&C '23). 
Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 312–318. 
↗ doi.org/10.1145/3591196.3596819. 

Berlin School of Public Engagement 
and Open Science, and Cyber Valley. 
2023. The Principles of Public 
Engagement, 2nd Edition. Museum für 
Naturkunde Berlin. 

Beach, Michael W., Christina Graves, 
and Tyler Fox. 2024. »Speculative F/ 
Actors: Climate Futures – Crafting 
a Workshop for Collaborative 
Worldbuilding in Cataclysmic 
Climates.« In Proceedings of the 
Halfway to the Future Symposium 

(HttF '24). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, Article 41, 1–9. 
↗ doi.org/10.1145/3686169.3686192. 

Beattie, Hamish, David Brown, and 
Sarah Kindon. 2020. »Solidarity 
through Difference: Speculative 
Participatory Serious Urban Gaming 
(SPS-UG).« International Journal of 
Architectural Computing 18 (2): 141–54. 
↗ doi.org/10.1177/1478077120924337. 

Chopra, Simran, Rachel E. Clarke, 
Adrian K. Clear, Sara Heitlinger, Ozge 
Dilaver, and Christina Vasiliou. 2022. 
»Negotiating Sustainable Futures in 
Communities through Participatory 
Speculative Design and Experiments 
in Living.« In Proceedings of the 2022 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '22). 
Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, Article 334, 1–17. 
↗ doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501929. 

Darby, Andy, and Emmanuel Tsekleves. 
2018. »Mentian: Developing Design 
Fiction for Dementia Policy.« In 

Design as a Catalyst for Change – DRS 
International Conference 2018, 
edited by Carla Storni, Kate Leahy, 
Mark McMahon, Peter Lloyd, 
and Emanuela Bohemia, 25–28 
June, Limerick, Ireland. 
↗ doi.org/10.21606/drs.2018.608. 

Duggan, James R., Joseph Lindley, and 
Sarah McNicol. 2017. »Near Future 
School: World Building beyond a 
Neoliberal Present with Participatory 
Design Fictions.« Futures 94: 15–23. 
↗ doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2017.04.001. 

Dunne, Anthony, and Fiona Raby. 2013. 

Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, 
and Social Dreaming. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press. 

Forlano, Laura, and Anijo Mathew. 
2014. »From Design Fiction to Design 
Friction: Speculative and Participatory 
Design of Values-Embedded Urban 
Technology.« Journal of Urban 
Technology 21 (4): 7–24. ↗ doi.org/10.10 
80/10630732.2014.971525. 

Groß, Benedikt, and Eileen Mandir. 
2022. Zukünfte gestalten: Spekulation. 
Kritik. Innovation. Verlag Hermann 
Schmidt. 

Hancock, Trevor, and Clement Bezold. 
1994. »Possible Futures, 
Preferable Futures.« Healthcare 
Forum Journal 37 (2): 23–29. 
↗ pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10132155. 

Hansen, Helene H., Sara P. Knudsen, 
and Rikke Ørngreen. 2021. 
»Speculative Design as a Method 
of Inquiry in an Online Workshop 
Setting.« In 20th European Conference 
on e-Learning, ECEL 2021, edited 
by Carsten Busch, Martin Steinicke, 
Regina Frieß, and Tilo Wendler, 218–26. 

Lau, Hebitz C. H., and Jeffrey C. F. Ho. 
2021. »Dimension-Based Interactions 
with Virtual Assistants: A Co-Design 
Project with Design Fictions.« 

Multimodal Technologies and 
Interaction 5 (12): 78. 
↗ doi.org/10.3390/mti5120078. 

Liao, Q. Vera, and Michael Muller. 
2019. »Enabling Value Sensitive 
AI Systems through Participatory 
Design Fictions.« arXiv, preprint 
arXiv:1912.07381. 
↗ arxiv.org/abs/1912.07381. 

Nijs, Greg, Giulietta Laki, Rafaella 
Houlstan, Guillaume Slizewicz, 
and Thomas Laureyssens. 2020. 
»Fostering More-than-Human 
Imaginaries: Introducing DIY 
Speculative Fabulation in Civic HCI.« 
In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction: Shaping Experiences, 
Shaping Society (NordiCHI 2020). 
Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, Article 36, 1–12. 
↗ doi.org/10.1145/3419249.3420147. 

Pólvora, Alexandre, and Susana 
Nascimento. 2021. »Foresight and 
Design Fictions Meet at a Policy Lab: 
An Experimentation Approach 
in Public Sector Innovation.« 
Futures 128: 102709. 
↗ doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2021.102709. 

Rüller, Sarah, Konstantin Aal, 
Peter Tolmie, Andrea Hartmann, 
Markus Rohde, and Volker Wulf. 
2022. »Speculative Design as a 
Collaborative Practice: Ameliorating 
the Consequences of Illiteracy 
through Digital Touch.« ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction 29 (3): Article 23, 1–58. 
↗ doi.org/10.1145/3487917. 

Schuijer, Jantien W., Jacqueline E.W. 
Broerse, and Frank Kupper. 2021. 
»Citizen Science Fiction: The Potential 
of Situated Speculative Prototyping 
for Public Engagement on Emerging 
Technologies.« NanoEthics 15: 1–18. 
↗ doi.org/10.1007/s11569-020-00382-4. 

Schwabe, Stefan, Jannis Hülsen, and 
Angelika Trübswetter, eds. 2022. 
Farming the Uncanny Valley. Verlag 
der Universität der Künste Berlin. 
↗ doi.org/10.25624/kuenste-1787. 

Tsekleves, Emmanuel, Andy Darby, 
Anna Whicher, and Piotr Swiatek. 2017. 
»Co-Designing Design Fictions: A New 
Approach for Debating and Priming 
Future Healthcare Technologies 
and Services.« Archives of Design 
Research 30 (2): 5–21. 

Tsekleves, Emmanuel, Min Hooi Yong, 
Clarissa Ai Ling Lee, Sabir Giga, 
Jung Shan Hwang, and Sian Lun Lau. 
2019. »Rethinking How Healthcare Is 
Conceptualised and Delivered through 
Speculative Design in the UK and 
Malaysia: A Comparative Study.« The 
Design Journal 22 (sup1): 429–44. 
↗ doi.org/10.1080/14606925.2019.15 
95430. 

Trier, Steffen Hviid, and Tom Jenkins. 
2021. »Participatory Sensing in 
the Speculative Smart City.« In 

Proceedings of the 32nd Australian 
Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction (OzCHI '20). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 462–70. 
↗ doi.org/10.1145/3441000.3441079. 

Tyszczuk, Renata. 2021. »Collective 
Scenarios: Speculative Improvisations 
for the Anthropocene.« Futures 
134: 102854. ↗ doi.org/10.1016/j. 
futures.2021.102854. 

Ye, Yingfei, and Duoduo Zhang. 2024. 
»Co-Creating Pluralistic Futures: 
A Systematic Literature Review on 
Participatory Speculative Design.« In 
DRS2024: Boston, edited by C. Gray, 

E. Ciliotta Chehade, P. Hekkert, L. 
Forlano, P. Ciuccarelli, and P. Lloyd. 
↗ doi.org/10.21606/drs.2024.1316. 
15 

 Guiding 2 

To fully realize the potential of collaborative speculation,
designing the process well in advance is essential. Thisincludes understanding why you want to speculate andwhat you ideally want to achieve through speculation,
finding themes and questions to speculate about,
identifying with whom you want to speculate, and finally,
finding the right conditions for all these ideas to flourish

 Questions

and create valuable engagement. 

for DesigningCollaborative 
Speculation 


18 Chapter 2 — Guiding Questions for Designing Collaborative Speculation 19 


’ 

20 Chapter 2 — Guiding Questions for Designing Collaborative Speculation 21 


Speculative 3

 Workshop 

In this chapter, we give you the tools youneed to start speculating. Mix and matchand see what works best for you! 

Worksheets to accompany the speculation methodspresented in this chapter can be found online at:
↗ doi.org/10.18452/31342

Tools 


Tools for creating a welcoming atmosphere, formingspeculation groups, and entering a speculative mode ofinteraction. 
3.1 Getting Started 
3.1 Getting Started 
Tools for creating a welcoming atmosphere, formingspeculation groups, and entering a speculative mode ofinteraction. 

Setting the Space 

Upon entering, the setup of the 
workshop space will influence each 
participant’s expectations for the session. 
Use this opportunity to set the tone for 
speculation: What images, materials, 
or objects will participants see as they 
enter? What music or soundscapes will 
they encounter? 

You can choose to place objects in 
the workshop space for participants 
to interact with, e.g., research objects, 
objects illustrating the theme, or material 
samples. Or you might choose to display 
images on the walls to illustrate the topic; 
these images could be curated by you 
or sent in by the participants. If you are 
in contact with the participants before 
the workshop, you could share a topical 
question and ask participants to send an 
image in response (e.g., »What comes to 
mind when you think about …?«) 

What kinds of workshop materials 
do you want to be visible (e.g., materials 
for note-taking, sketching, prototyping)? 
What should not be revealed until the 
actual start of the workshop? 

Workshop participants deliberating in a speculation group. 
Photo: Felix Noak 


Speculation Groups 

To prepare for collaborative speculation, 
we recommend forming groups of three 
to five co-speculators. With groups 
of this size, every member is likely to 

contribute, while group decision-making 
is still feasible within reasonable time 
limits. 

Self-assembled groups 

In short workshops with little time for 
introductions, consider allowing groups 
to form organically, with the participants 
speculating with the people whom 
they arrived with. Simply set up the 
workshop space with tables that can 
accommodate chairs for three to five 
people. Participants can choose where to 
sit when they enter, and each table forms 
a speculation group. 

Groups based on name tags 

If there is more time for introductions, 
consider forming groups randomly so 
that participants encounter unfamiliar 
perspectives in their interactions with 
their co-speculators. An elegant method 
for randomly assigning groups is to use 
name tags in different colors or with 
specific symbols; these are given out to 
participants as they arrive. Later in the 
workshop, participants with matching 
tags find each other to form speculation 
groups. 

Groups based on speculation topics 

If speculation groups will work on 
different topics during the workshop, 
consider allowing participants to choose 
their group. To do so, label the tables in 
the workshop space with keywords that 
broadly describe the speculation topics 
(e.g., communication, health, mobility, …) 
and ask participants to choose a keyword 
when they arrive. Participants then 
select a topic (and a group) by sitting at 
the table corresponding to their chosen 
keyword. 

25 

26 Chapter 3 — Speculative Workshop Tools 27 


Futures Check-In 


Individually or in groups of 3–5 
3–12 min
→ Participants reflect on personal roles, interests, and values 
A ›futures check-in‹ encourages participants to start the workshop with 
a brief reflection: What perspectives do I bring to the table? What is 
important to me today? Participants can reflect either individually or jointly 
in the speculation groups as a way to introduce themselves to each other. 

You will find the futures check-in template on the following page and 
online.* In our version, participants fill in their (first) name, two roles they 
take on in their daily lives, and then select up to three areas of interest 
from a list. 

Throughout the course of the workshop, ask participants to return to 
their futures check-in. What was particularly important to them when they 
entered the workshop? How do their everyday roles reflect the way in 
which they interact with the world around them? Could this feed into their 
speculations? 

For facilitators, the futures check-in can be a very helpful way to grasp 
the different perspectives in the room, even if you are not able to follow all 
individual introductions. To this end, you can invite participants to leave 
their check-ins out on the table or to share them with the whole group by 
displaying them on a board. 


A simple workshop setup for a speculation group featuring the 
futures check-in. Photo: Richard Ley 

* The worksheet templates mentioned in this guidebook, as the guide itself, are available online at ↗ doi.org/10.18452/31342. 
They are published under a CC BY 4.0 licence, which means that you may use, share, and adapt them for any purpose, 
provided that you attribute them to CollActive Materials. Please find further information at ↗ creativecommons.org. 
28 Chapter 3 — Speculative Workshop Tools 29 


Tried-and-tested approaches for grounding speculations inscientific research. 
3.2 Research Insights 
Tried-and-tested approaches for grounding speculations inscientific research. 
3.2 Research Insights 
Research informs and inspires futures, and thus plays anintegral role in our speculation process. This second phaseof the workshop provides participants with research-backed 
basic information about the theme and highlights unansweredquestions and untapped potential. The aim of this phase is tolevel the knowledge playing field – to reach a state in whicheveryone has the information they need to speculate, withoutplacing ›experts‹ on a pedestal. If possible, consider expandingthis informative phase by also including perspectives from 
non-academic contexts. 

31 

’ 

32 Chapter 3 — Speculative Workshop Tools 33 


34 35 


3.3 Speculation 
A step-by-step guide to facilitating research-inspiredspeculations. 

This phase is the heart of every speculation workshop. It invitesparticipants to imagine future worlds inspired by researchinsights and their own experiences, values, and interests. At 
the end, each group will have created a future scenario andideally a tangible artifact, represented through sketches and 

descriptions. 

Facilitating Speculation 

Below we share a few guidelines to help 
facilitate speculation. Pick and choose 
what supports your topic and aims – 
speculation is a mindset rather than a set 
of rules. 

Speculating, not forecasting 

Speculation opens up a space of 
imagination in which many things are 
possible. Explain to participants that 
the aim is not to predict the most likely 
version of the future, but to imagine 
different possible scenarios. Likewise, it 
is not necessary to map out exactly how 
a new technology (or any other concept) 
will work. Encourage participants 
to embrace unknown possibilities in 
research and societal developments 
rather than focusing on how feasible 
their scenarios are or how exactly their 
imagined technologies would work. 

Set a timeframe 

Give participants guidance by setting a 
timeframe. In our workshops, 25 years 
into the future has proved to be the sweet 
spot for meaningful speculation. This 
timeframe is sufficiently far in the future 
for significant changes to occur while at 
the same time being close enough for 
participants to have agency in bringing 
these changes about. 

Encourage individual perspectives 

Most meaningful speculations are 
informed by personal experiences, tastes, 
emotions, and knowledge – in general, 

personal ways of looking at the world(s) 
around us. Encourage participants to 
bring what they know, think, and feel to 
the speculation table. 

Focus on the everyday 

Future transformations become relatable 
when they are expressed through the 
lens of everyday experience. Always 
invite participants to imagine what might 
change on an individual or family level, or 
among circles of friends, colleagues, or 
any other groups in their lives: How would 
the day-to-day be different in the future 
scenario? 

Find the friction 

It is tempting to enter into entirely 
utopian or dystopian narratives, but 
the magic of speculation lies in the 
in-between. Invite participants to 
get specific and build frictions and 
ambiguities into their scenarios. How 
would different people’s experiences 
vary? What values might be in conflict? 
Is the scenario really as perfect or as 
strange as it seems? 

Use examples with care 

One of the fundamental challenges 
of facilitating speculation is that 
participants are often uncertain as to 
what a speculative scenario or artifact 
might look like. You can use examples 
to illustrate, but be cautious – examples 
often stick in the mind and influence final 
ideas. Try to explain without examples or 
use a variety of different examples and 
limit the time that you spend discussing 
each of them. 

37 

39 39 

41 41 

42 43 


Speculation Sketch

 
Speculation groups of 3–5 
5–15 min / For workshops of any length 
→ Speculators sketch out their ideas 
In this final stage of the speculation phase, each group puts their ideas for 
future scenarios or artifacts down on paper. You can use and adapt the 
speculation sketch template we provide online; on the template, each group 
enters their (first) names, gives their scenario/artifact a title, draws a sketch, 
and provides a brief description. Speculation sketches can be shared with 
other groups in the final phase of the workshop or be used afterward to 
display the outcomes. 


Speculation sketches from a speculation 
workshop on mycelium use in architecture. 
Photos: Richard Ley 

44 Chapter 3 — Speculative Workshop Tools 45 


Prototyping makes speculative ideas tangible. This allowsfutures to be shared and discussed with all participants – orwith a wider audience after the workshop. 
Prototyping makes speculative ideas tangible. This allows 

3.4 Prototyping futures to be shared and discussed with all participants – orwith a wider audience after the workshop. 
Quick methods for bringing speculations to life. 

47 

Object Prototyping

 
Speculation groups of 3–5 
30–45 min / For workshops of any length 
→ Speculators turn their ideas into tangible objects 
In this often-used form of prototyping, speculation groups bring their ideas 
to life in small-scale models or objects that embody the essence of their 
future scenarios or artifacts. 

For this method, provide the workshop participants with various 
materials and tools (see below). Encourage creativity and remind the 
groups that the goal is to communicate ideas, not to create perfect objects. 
Allocate at least 30 minutes to this phase and check in with the groups 
regularly to help them manage their time. 

Given the fragility of many prototypes, consider documenting them with 
photographs during or immediately after the workshop. If you intend to 
display or transport the prototypes, bring a sturdy box or container to store 
them in safely. This is especially important if you are planning an exhibition 
or future presentations. 

Materials and tools 

The selection of prototyping materials provided should be diverse but 
does not need to be extensive – often, fewer options stimulate greater 
creativity. Keep your workshop goals in mind when selecting materials: Opt 
for colorful materials for playful prototypes or provide options in limited 
colors to create a shared aesthetic and maintain the focus on the underlying 
speculative ideas. 

Prototyping in progress during CollActive Materials workshops. 
Photos: Felix Noak (left), Richard Ley (right) 


Chapter 3 — Speculative Workshop Tools 


Base materials in various sizes and qualities 

→ Paper and cardboard 
→ Cloth, cotton, yarn, thread 
→ Wood, e.g., popsicle sticks 
→ Air-dry clay or modeling clay 
→ Foil, e.g., biodegradable cellulose 
→ Waste materials 
Specific materials 

→ Materials related to the research topic 
→ Materials used or created during a ↗hands-on experience 
→ Materials with specific functions, e.g., straws, balloons, stickers 
→ Materials that stimulate different senses 
Binders or other connecting materials 

→ Glue 
→ Adhesive tape 
→ Wire, bare or covered with paper or yarn 
→ Sewing kits 
→ Stapler 
Cutting tools 

→ Scissors 
→ (Cutting) ruler 
→ Cutting knives 
→ Cutting mats 
Shaping tools 

→ Ceramic tools 
→ Water bowls to use with clay 
Drawing and writing equipment 

→ Pens 
→ Markers 
→ Inks, paint, brushes 
49 

50 51 


’ 

52 53 


In this final phase of the workshop, co-speculators present the 

3.5 Sharing Futures future scenarios and prototypes that they have developed in
their groups. This part of the workshop is essential, as it reveals 
Ways for participants to share and debate their ideas each group’s process, enabling others to gain insights into it, 
with each other. and creates space for reflection and debate. 

55 

’ 

’ 

56 57 


’ 

58 59 


4

Case Studies 

In this chapter, we present three case studiesfrom our project, each of which is unique inits own way. We provide concept overviewsand workshop plans as examples. See themnot as step-by-step instructions for you tofollow, but rather as sketches of experiments

 from

that you can refer to when shaping your own.

 CollActive 
Materials 


62 63 


64 65 


66 67 


68 69 


70 71 


72 73 


74 75 


Image Captions 

Front Cover: Balloon samples made from biodegradable cellulose, developed by textile designer Eva 
Bullermann. Photo: Michelle Mantel 
Inside Front Cover: Speculation sketch and bubble prototype, co-created during a workshop on soft 

robotics and magic machines. Photo: Richard Ley 
Page 6/7: Experience station at a workshop on air and climate. Several of these stations were 

conceptualized and facilitated by Prof. Clemens Winkler and the students of the Masters program 
»Spiel und Objekt« at Ernst Busch University of Theatre Arts Berlin. Photo: German Palomeque 
Page 14/15: Collage prototype, co-designed during a workshop on material futures. 

Photo: CollActive Materials 

Page 20/21: Collage prototype, co-designed during a workshop on material futures. 
Photo: CollActive Materials 
Page 22: Several material samples of degradable and non-degradable plastics, at a workshop on material 

futures. Photo: Richard Ley 
Page 28: Workshop participants during a hands-on experience at Futurium Lab. Photo: Richard Ley 
Page 34: Speculative designer Emilia Tikka consulting a workshop group during their speculation process. 

Photo: Felix Noak 
Page 44: Prototyping with pine bark, the research object itself. Photo: Richard Ley 
Page 52: Workshop participants sharing their speculative ideas with each other. Photo: Felix Noak 
Page 58/59: Collective performance AIRNSHARE #2 by artist Doris Dziersk, during the closing night of the 

exhibition AIRBOUND. Photo: Felix Noak 
Page 74: Workshop participants prototyping with air-drying clay and hydrogels. Photo: Richard Ley 
Inside Back Cover: Prototype of a novel material combining hydrogel and solar fibers, co-created during a 

workshop on climate-adaptive architecture. Photo: Richard Ley 
Back Cover: Prototype of a hydrogel brick for sustainable flood prevention, co-created during a workshop 
on climate-adaptive architecture. Photo: Richard Ley 

Imprint 

© CollActive Materials, 2025 

Authors: Dr. Kristin Werner & Antje Nestler 
Editing: Liliana Alfreda, probicon GmbH 
Graphic Design: NODE Berlin Oslo 
(Serge Rompza, Georg Stahlbock) 
Production: Gallery Print 

The CollActive Materials Team: 

Project Leaders: Dr. Léa Perraudin & 
Dr. Martin Müller 
Coordination & Public Engagement: 
Dr. Kristin Werner 
Project Assistant: Eva Bullermann 
Principal Investigators: Prof. Dr. Oliver 
Brock, Prof. Dr. Claudia Mareis, Antje 
Nestler, Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Schäffner, 
Solveig Steinhardt 

Workshop & Exhibition Support: 
Julia Blumenthal, Eileen Klingner, 
Maxim Landau, Richard Ley 
Project Consultants: Martin Kim Luge, 
Mina Mahouti, Emilia Tikka, 
Prof. Clemens Winkler 

Researchers, designers, and artists 
who contributed to the workshops and 
exhibitions: 
Rodolfo Acosta Castro, Dimitra Almpani-
Lekka, Bastian Beyer, PhD, Valerian 
Blos, Lena Böckmann, Eva Bullermann, 
Prof. Dr. Oliver Brock, Monika Dorniak, 
Doris Dziersk, Dr. Michaela Eder, Mari 
Hakopyan, Friedel Hänsel, Johanna 
Hehemeyer Cürten, Yoonha Kim, 
Leonie Kopineck, Dr. Maxime Le Calvé, 
Gosia Lehmann, Katja Lonzeck, Martin 
Kim Luge, Prof. Dr. John Nyakatura, 
Mina Mahouti, Natalija Miodragović, 
Jonas Olbrich, Vili Pääkkö, Anne von 
Petersdorff, Felix Rasehorn, Veronika 
Risnovska, Anna Schäffner, Maxie 
Schneider, Emilia Tikka, Apoorv Vaish, 
Jeffrey van der Geest, Brenda Vazquez, 
Dr. Charlett Wenig, Prof. Clemens Winkler 

Over the course of our project, about 
300 workshop participants have shared 
their ideas and speculations with us. 
We acknowledge every single person’s 
contribution – without them, this project 
would not have been possible. Thank you! 

Realized by: 


Funded by the Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research (BMBF) and the 
State of Berlin as part of the Excellence 
Strategy of the German federal and state 
governments. 

Funding is granted by the »Berlin 
University Alliance. Crossing Boundaries 
towards an Integrated Research 
Environment«, the alliance of Freie 
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität 
zu Berlin, Technische Universität Berlin 
and Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
funded by the Excellence Strategy of the 
German federal and state Governments/ 
Universities of Excellence funding line. 

The authors acknowledge the 
support of the Cluster of Excellence 
»Matters of Activity. Image Space 
Material« funded by the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German 
Research Foundation) under Germany's 
Excellence Strategy – EXC 2025 – 
390648296. 



